man Google Chrome kind of sucks now
right I remember when everyone was
screaming stop using Internet Explorer
Chrome is so much faster was that all a
lie no actually Chrome was a revolution
it was lightweight fast as I'll get out
and it brought great features like tab
sandboxing so that if one of your tabs
froze your entire browser didn't have to
crash like the old days so what changed
then to turn Chrome into this bloated
Ram devouring Behemoth maybe it was
you me I mean I don't have the best
browsing habits I leave way too many
tabs open but Chrome has a way of
dealing with that using Dynamic caching
for the tabs I'm not using sure but is
Google the one who installed all those
extensions I mean I don't have that many
I just have zoto for tracking my
research language
tool tele party and an ad locker could
it be that his insatable thirst for
extra functionality is bogging down his
browser as it turns out yes I need to
make some Chang
but not every extension is made equal
while some had no effect on browser
performance others like last pass
reduced performance by as much as 12% an
effect that Stacks across your library
of resource sucking add-ons with 2third
of people using Chrome as a default
browser it's clear that we need to see
just how bad this situation is explore
what can be done to fix it and talk
about Google's solution including why it
might be a bad one so quickly now to the
lab wait this isn't the lab this is the
segue to our sponsor ODU if you own a
business you'll know what I mean when I
say you probably have too many apps
running at the same time with odu's
all-in-one business software you can
combine all of those into a single
unified platform so click the link in
the description to learn more our Labs
team has a fair bit of experience under
their belt testing video games and
productivity apps but this is one of our
first for into browser performance and
how exactly you measure browser
performance is a big question primarily
because browsers are big programs
chromium the open source framework that
Chrome is based on is 31 million lines
of code that is almost as much as the
Linux kernel the core of Linux based
operating systems and it's close to the
estimated count for older complete
operating systems like Windows XP which
Probably sounds ludicrous right until
you consider that I mean outside of
games how many programs do you run that
aren't in your browser and of those ones
how many of them are just web apps that
could run in your browser so the thing
is modern browsers need to be able to
support pretty much everything from
28-year-old geoc cities pages to
full-blown Photoshop clones so coming
back to the question of how to measure
their
performance it's challenging because
browsers do a lot of different things
but we're going to do our best starting
with a machine that is based on the most
common specifications in a recent steam
Hardware survey to look at memory use we
opened up Chrome to a set of common web
pages and on a clean system measured our
idle RAM usage at around 1.1 GB which
increased to 1.25 when we were streaming
4K video even on a system with just 8
gigs of RAM that's not a problematic
amount of usage and it's important to
note that even if it was higher that
isn't necessarily A Bad Thing programs
that need to access information quickly
will benefit from using up more R and as
long as they give it up in the event
that your Os or another program needs it
it's not really a problem but what
happens when we add extensions well as
it turns out it depends on the type our
password manager last pass and our
thirdparty spell checker grammarly both
used considerably more RAM than say
coupon code collector honey one
extension insert usual disclaimer about
the impact on creators actually reduced
our overall RAM usage and that was
ublock origin which is clearly
effectively blocking ads and trackers
from sapping our system resources though
funnily enough the more popular ad block
extension didn't have the same effect
which kind of makes us question its
Effectiveness especially when they
advertise that their extension saves
memory overall with 10 of the most
popular extensions we observed a nearly
50% increase in RAM usage with half a
dozen tabs open that's not that big of a
deal but as your tab addiction grows so
unfortunately does your Problem by the
time we reached 48 tabs we were looking
at a whole 2 GB of extra RAM usage for
what is functionally the same user
experience I mean you're not looking at
all those windows at once are you I mean
of course if you have ample system
memory you're probably not going to
notice the difference anyway will you
actually you might to gauge performance
of our browsers we ran several
benchmarks that aim to test the many
features of the web in motion Mark which
measures Graphics per performance in our
browser most of our extensions caused
virtually no change in performance
except this is kind of a funny one our
ad blockers you see ad blockers need to
interact with the rendering pipeline in
order to hide ads without turning your
web pages into a completely fragmented
mess and that appears to have resulted
in a reduction in in browser rendering
performance now in the real world this
slowdown is going to be masked by other
speed benefits but we thought it was an
interesting observation nonetheless
moving on to speedometer a benchmark
that's f focused on simulating user
experiences like working with a to-do
list editing Rich Text rendering charts
and reading news sites we found a
totally different story here it's last
pass causing a big slowdown and our best
guess is that this is due to last pass
trying to scan every text field for
potential autofill opportunities in jet
stream 2 a benchmark that's focused on
smooth
operation we found that ad block and
grammarly did a lot of damage but then
last pass was relatively benign and then
in web expert 4.0 we measured just 3%
reduced performance with all of our
extensions enabled at once so sometimes
your extensions matter sometimes they
don't and sometimes different ones will
or won't the results just don't really
seem to add up to a clear picture but
hey maybe the problem is we're looking
too closely if we zoom out and look at
the overall a clear Trend develops
especially when we configure our browser
like a regular person would and we have
multiple extensions running concurrently
with everything enabled we lose
something like a quarter of our
performance in the Chrome web browser if
you're a major Surfer 25% that's the
kind of difference that you could really
notice in day-to-day use I mean think of
all the extra LTT behind the scenes that
you could watch on lm. g/ flat plane
with all that extra time so what do we
do about this well some extensions are
always consuming some level of system
resources and you can track this
Yourself by pressing shift escape to
open the Chrome tab task manager at the
bottom of your list will be your
extensions and writing this right now
I'm noticing some of my extensions being
needlessly active page downloader single
file why is that open I'm not
downloading anything but then the PDF
editing extension that I'm using seems
to respect the fact that I don't always
need it running and it's not consuming
anything now's a perfect time then to go
through and call some of your more
inconsiderate extensions especially if
you aren't using them that much anymore
all it'll cost you is a few seconds to
click that little puzzle block and
here's a good rule of thumb if you don't
remember the last time you used it or
what it's for just get rid of it you can
always reinstall it later if you have
lots of RAM and good tab management
turning off the memory saving feature in
Chrome will speed things up as well as
Chrome will spend less time reloading
Pages preloading Pages can also speed
things up but if you're someone who uses
an ad blocker or a privacy extension
pre-loading isn't really an option
speaking of privacy this is unrelated to
your extensions but what you're in the
menu why not stop by the add privacy
section and turn all of that tracking
off we can't really give you an after
result for the impact of all the changes
you just made I mean your mileage may
vary depending on what you removed or
didn't and your overall web browsing
habits but from what we've seen
anecdotally it is very possible that
you'll notice a
difference just not in startup times
this was a really interesting part of
our test that we're tacking on the end
here we found that with a reasonable
extension load out the application takes
about the same amount of time to Launch
regardless of what you do or don't have
active then again I guess who cares
anyway because when's the last time you
closed Chrome I see that update button
the last thing that you can do is to
uninstall chrome and I'm only kind of
joking right now the roll out of
Google's manifest V3 is set to
dramatically change the capabilities of
chromium extensions which by the way
also affect Microsoft Edge now
especially hindering the effectiveness
of ad blockers and privacy enhancing
extensions we have haven't tested
firefox's performance with you know
extensions or without cuz realistically
most of you aren't using it but hey
maybe next time we do an update on this
the situation will have changed because
you'll have listened to Our advice why
not give it a try and while you're at it
why not try out our sponsor Odo if
you're running a business keeping track
of a hundred different apps all running
at once can be a pain I mean just
imagine all those Chrome tabs with odu's
all-in-one business management software
you can combine them into a single
Unified operating system check out their
CRM and sales apps which make lead
generation and closing deals easier than
ever their time sheets app helps you
keep close track of your employee
schedules and their accounting app lets
you autocreate and send invoices and it
integrates with 28,000 Banks from all
around the world and if you only need
one single app to shore up some holes
hey you can get access to that for free
so start saving time and resources by
unifying your processes with ODU you can
check them out in the description for a
free 14-day trial or to set up a demo
with their expert team thanks for
watching if you guys liked this video
maybe you'll enjoy another Deep dive
into minor differences in computer
performance check out our video where we
tested 12 of the same CPU so that we
could find a set of them that were
nearly identical in performance why did
we need those we'll never
tell well we will in that video but not
here